feat: serverless worker (#4445)
temporalio/documentation: docs/encyclopedia/workers/serverless-workers.mdx

<CaptionedImage
  src="/diagrams/serverless-worker-flow.svg"
  srcDark="/diagrams/serverless-worker-flow-dark.svg"
  alt="Serverless invocation flow"
  title="Temporal's Worker Controller Instance invokes a Serverless Worker when Tasks arrive on a Task Queue with a compute provider configured."
/>

Temporal's internal Worker Controller Instance (WCI) decides when to start, scale, and stop compute invocations.

The invocation flow works as follows:

1. A Task is submitted (for example, `StartWorkflow` or `ScheduleActivity`).
2. The [Matching Service](/temporal-service/temporal-server#matching-service) attempts to route the Task directly to an
   available Worker (a sync match).
3. If a Worker is available, the Task is routed to that Worker.
4. If no Worker is available (sync match fails), the Matching Service pushes a signal to the WCI, and the WCI invokes
   the configured compute provider (for example, calling AWS Lambda's `InvokeFunction` API).
5. The Serverless Worker starts, creates a Temporal Client, and begins polling the Task Queue.
6. The Worker processes available Tasks until it exits (see [Worker lifecycle](#worker-lifecycle)).

> The WCI also monitors the Task Queue backlog independently. If tasks arrive faster than Workers can process them, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The WCI also monitors the Task Queue backlog independently. If Tasks arrive faster than Workers can process them, the
```

WCI invokes additional Workers in parallel until the backlog drains or provider concurrency limits are reached.

Each invocation is independent. The Worker creates a fresh client connection on every invocation. There is no connection
reuse or shared state across invocations.

## Autoscaling {#autoscaling}

Temporal automatically scales Serverless Workers based on Task Queue signals. When Tasks arrive and no Worker is

> available, Temporal invokes new Workers. When the work is done, Workers exit and scale to zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
available, Temporal invokes new Workers. When the Tasks are done, Workers exit and scale to zero.
```

The WCI uses two signals to decide when to invoke new Workers:

### Sync match failure {#sync-match-failure}

When a Task is submitted, the [Matching Service](/temporal-service/temporal-server#matching-service) attempts to route
it directly to an available Worker. If no Worker is available, the sync match fails, and the Matching Service pushes a
signal to the WCI. The WCI then invokes a new Worker. This is the primary scaling path. Because the Matching Service
pushes match failures to the WCI as they happen rather than the WCI polling on a timer, latency stays low and scaling is
responsive.

### Task Queue backlog {#task-queue-backlog}

The WCI monitors Task Queue metadata to determine whether pending Tasks exist without enough Workers to process them. If

> there is work on the queue and not enough Workers, the WCI invokes additional Workers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there are Tasks on the queue and not enough Workers, the WCI invokes additional Workers.
```

## Scaling with long-lived Workers {#scaling-with-long-lived-workers}

Serverless Workers can share a Task Queue with long-lived Workers.
Because Serverless Workers are only invoked on [sync match failure](#sync-match-failure), Serverless Workers only pick up Tasks that no long-lived Worker was available to handle.
In practice, the Serverless Workers act as spillover capacity for the long-lived fleet.

If you configure Serverless and long-lived Workers on the same Task Queue, do not enable dynamic scaling on the long-lived Workers.
The two groups cannot coordinate their scaling behavior.
If both scale dynamically, the long-lived Workers may scale up to handle the same Tasks that Temporal is simultaneously invoking Serverless Workers for, leading to unnecessary invocations and unpredictable scaling.

## Worker lifecycle {#worker-lifecycle}

A single Serverless Worker invocation has three phases: init, work, and shutdown.

<CaptionedImage
  src="/diagrams/serverless-worker-lifecycle.svg"
  srcDark="/diagrams/serverless-worker-lifecycle-dark.svg"
  alt="Serverless Worker lifecycle"

>   title="The shutdown deadline buffer controls when the Worker stops polling, and the Worker stop timeout controls how long the Worker waits for in-flight Tasks to finish before shutdown hooks run. Diagram is not to scale. Shutdown hooks typically take less than a few seconds."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  title="Diagram is not to scale. The shutdown deadline buffer controls when the Worker stops polling, and the Worker stop timeout controls how long the Worker waits for in-flight Tasks to finish before shutdown hooks run. Shutdown hooks typically take less than a few seconds."
```

During the **work** phase, the Worker polls the Task Queue and processes Tasks.

During the **shutdown** phase, the Worker stops polling, waits for in-flight Tasks to finish, and runs any shutdown
hooks (for example, OpenTelemetry telemetry flushes). Shutdown begins before the invocation deadline so the Worker can
exit cleanly before the compute provider forcibly terminates the execution environment.

### Tuning for long-running Activities

If your Worker handles long-running Activities, set these three values together:

- **Worker stop timeout > longest Activity runtime.** Gives in-flight Activities enough time to finish after polling
  stops.
- **Shutdown deadline buffer > Worker stop timeout + shutdown hook time.** Ensures the drain and any shutdown hooks
  complete before the compute provider terminates the environment.
- **Invocation deadline > longest Activity runtime + shutdown deadline buffer.** Set on the compute provider to give
  each invocation enough total runtime.

  :::tip

  If your longest-running Activity runs longer than half the maximum invocation deadline, this constraint may be difficult or impossible to meet.

>   In this case, use [Activity Heartbeats](/activity-heartbeat) to record the state of the Activity execution so that the next retry can pick up where it left off.

Reviewer: The Activity Heartbeats link goes to a 404.

invocation.

To isolate Activities from each other:

- Split Workflow and Activity Workers into separate compute functions.
- Set Activity slots to 1 per invocation.

With single-slot configuration, each Activity gets a dedicated execution environment.

## Constraints {#constraints}

| Constraint        | Detail                                                                                                                                    |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Activity duration | Must complete within the compute provider's invocation limit (minus shutdown deadline buffer). For AWS Lambda, the maximum is 15 minutes. |
| Workflow duration | No limit. Workflows of any duration work, regardless of the invocation timeout. A Workflow runs across as many invocations as needed.     |
| Worker code       | Same Temporal SDK Worker code, using the serverless Worker package for your SDK.                                                          |

> | Versioning        | [Worker Versioning](/worker-versioning) is required. Each Workflow must have an `AutoUpgrade` or `Pinned` behavior, set per-Workflow or as a worker-level default. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Versioning        | [Worker Versioning](/worker-versioning) is required. Each Workflow must have an `AutoUpgrade` or `Pinned` behavior, set per-Workflow or as a Worker-level default. |
```
